Revolutionary Commemoration 
============================

**Hannah Proctor**

No more anniversaries![1]

Vsevolod Meyerhold

Fire and Ice
------------

On 18<sup>th</sup> March 1921 the fiftieth anniversary of the foundation
of the Paris Commune was marked in the Russian Soviet Federative
Socialist Republic (RSFSR). Newspapers were emblazoned with headlines
decrying the brutal suppression of the heroic Communards by bourgeois
reactionary forces just seventy-two days after its foundation. In
Petrograd, Emma Goldman awoke from an anxious night’s sleep to hear
people marching through the streets singing ‘The Internationale’. She,
however, experienced the city that day as a ‘ghastly corpse’ and to her
mournful ears the song’s ‘strains, once jubilant … sounded like a
funeral dirge for humanity’s flaming hope’.[2] Her bitter reaction to
this celebratory occasion was not a reflection on the fate of the Paris
Commune itself but a response to more recent events. Just one day
before, the guns of Kronstadt, the echoes of which had resounded across
the streets of Petrograd for the past twelve days, abruptly stopped.
Sailors from the Baltic Fleet based in the fortified city on the island
of Konin had mutinied in solidarity with workers’ demonstrations and
strikes in the former capital. Many who had fought enthusiastically for
the Revolution and been recognised by the Bolsheviks for their loyalty,
were now demanding reforms and accusing the Party of betrayal. The
Politburo issued an ultimatum and a Red Army attack was launched over
the still frozen waters. After ten days the rebels surrendered.[3]
Brutal reprisals followed. As the Paris Commune anniversary banners
moved past Goldman’s window, the corpses of Red Army soldiers sent to
quash the rebellion, in what Victor Serge described as a ‘ghastly
fraticide’, still lay scattered across the blood-spattered ice of the
melting Neva.[4]

Admittedly Goldman and fellow American anarchist Alexander Berkman were
unusual in how decisively they interpreted the events in Kronstadt.[5]
Years later Leon Trotsky not only reiterated the necessity for crushing
the revolt but characterised it as a counter-revolutionary ‘armed
reaction of the petty bourgeoisie against the hardships of social
revolution’ and remained unrepentant about the severity of the attack
against it, branding Goldman and Berkman sentimental pacifists.[6]
Nonetheless, the anniversary of the Commune and the suppression of the
Kronstadt uprising clanged up against one another jarringly, creating an
uneasy sense of (dis)analogy. In an ironic last gesture, the battleship
‘Sevastapol’, which had been taken over by rebellious sailors during the
revolt, was renamed ‘The Paris Commune’ shortly after the mutiny was
suppressed; a peculiar floating monument to the hypocrisy Goldman found
so horrifying.[7]

Though framed as a lesson to improve upon rather than a model to
replicate (the Parisian proletariat lacked a party; faux socialist
‘petty bourgeois patriots’ were too heavily involved; everything
happened at the wrong time, etc., etc.), Trotsky, writing in 1921, like
Lenin before him, placed the October Revolution in a continuum with the
Paris Commune.[8] The Commune became exemplary as a kind of Communist
origin story, a tragic yet inspiring landmark in a fledgling canon of
leftist struggle that would soon, it was assumed, ricochet around the
world. Andy Willimott discusses how young activists experimenting with
new domestic arrangements and modes of living in the aftermath of the
October Revolution turned to the Paris Commune as ‘a model of direct
democracy, mutual cooperation, and collective reorganisation’:[9] the
Baku Commune of 1918 was framed as a ‘reincarnation’ of the Paris
Commune, while a commune group based at the Stalingrad Tractor Factory
proclaimed their explicit intention of emulating the martyred
Communards. Though Willimott stresses that Soviet activists tended to
rely on a romanticised image of the past, the example of the Paris
Commune nonetheless inspired concrete quotidian practices in the
present. Soviet babies were even named ‘*Parizhkommuna*’[10]: newly born
and future-oriented yet linked to a revolutionary inheritance.[11]

In the year preceding the fiftieth anniversary an enormous mass
spectacle, ‘Toward a World Commune’, had been staged in Petrograd on the
site of the former Stock Exchange, which enacted the history of the
Third International, portraying the October Revolution as the last step
before the ‘apotheosis’ of the proletarian struggles set in motion by
the Paris Commune was reached. At the end of the scene depicting the
defeat of the Communards: ‘workers remove the bodies of their fallen
comrades and hide the trampled red banner for future battles.’[12] The
past was bequeathed to the future. Similarly, the final intertitle of
Grigori Kozintsev and Leonid Trauberg’s 1929 film *New Babylon,* a
tragic love story set on the Parisian barricades of 1871*,* proclaims
‘Long live the Commune!’; its final shots show the words ‘Vive La
Commune!’ scrawled on a wall, implying that the dreams of the Commune
outlive the slaughtered Communards.

The 18th March, commemorating the Paris Commune, was an official day of
rest or *prazdnik* until 1929.[13] If Paris between 18 March and 28 May
1871 functioned (for a time at least) as a legitimation of, and kind of
prototype for, the October Revolution, ritualised and increasingly
formalised commemorations of the October Revolution itself soon became
central to the regime’s shifting master narrative.[14] In Trotsky’s
article on the lessons to be drawn from the Paris Commune, he concluded
with a volcanic metaphor, noting that the ‘temperament of the French
proletariat is a revolutionary lava. But this lava is now covered with
the ashes of skepticism’.[15] This contrast between the hot flowing lava
of an original eruption and the dull grey ash that subsequently smothers
it captures a contradiction common to revolutionary commemorations, one
starkly evident in the coincidence of the crushing of the Kronstadt
rebellion with the fiftieth anniversary celebrations of the Paris
Commune, but one which rousing future-oriented spectacles like ‘Toward a
World Commune’ sought to avoid. By 1927 Trotsky would be participating
in demonstrations against the official commemorations of the tenth
anniversary of the October Revolution, which was used to help justify
his expulsion from the Party.[16] In the wake of the centenary year of
the October Revolution (which was marked by little in the way of rousing
future-oriented spectacles) and as we approach the fiftieth anniversary
of May ‘68, can historic examples of revolutionary commemoration point
towards an appropriate form for revolutionaries hoping to transform the
present to reflect on revolutionary pasts? Or is the very notion of
commemorating revolution a contradiction in terms?

October in Novembers
--------------------

In his introduction to *October*, published to mark the centenary of the
October Revolution, which follows the upheavals of 1917 month-by-month,
China Miéville includes a short ‘Note on Dates’. Although he observes
that some historians of the Revolution have opted to use the Gregorian
calendar and thus date the Storming of the Winter Palace to November, he
justifies his decision to follow the Julian calendar, then still in use
in Russia, by stating his desire to remain in sync with the ‘the story
of the actors immersed in their moment’.[17] The Gregorian calendar was
adopted in the RSFSR in 1918. Unlike Miéville, Soviet officials
retroactively plotted revolutionary time on the newly introduced
calendar, synchronised with, yet hostile to, the capitalist world.
Hence, 7th November became the official holiday for celebrating the
anniversary of the October Revolution. (Today it remains an official
public holiday in Belarus, Kyrgyzstan and the *de facto* state of
Transnistria.)

In 1918, with the Civil War ongoing, the occasion of the first
anniversary of the October Revolution was marked by a mass feeding of
the population of Moscow, with children given priority, and an emphasis
placed on providing women with a break from domestic labour. Prisoners’
food rations were raised for a day and factory committees promised their
workers extra cigarettes.[18] Cafes and restaurants stayed open, serving
free meals.[19] Elaborate spectacles were organised in multiple
locations. The Moscow Organising Committee of the anniversary
celebrations announced that at 9pm on 7th November a ritual burning of
the ‘Old Imperial Order’ should be organised in every region with a
symbol of the ‘New System’, ‘to be decided by local regional comrades’,
taking its place.[20] Richard Stites contrasts the exuberant,
flamboyant, carnivalesque May Day celebrations that took place in
Petrograd that year with the stiff solemnity of the heavily orchestrated
anniversary commemorations in Moscow, in which, he claims, playful and
vividly coloured artistic contributions were ‘lost in the forest of
mass-produced discs emblazoned with the new hammer and sickle’.[21]
Stites imagines Lenin’s opprobrious frown scowling over and eventually
displacing the lively and chaotic celebrations of frolicsome utopians,
like ash settling over lava.[22] Focusing more on the formal than the
informal, Frederick C. Corney traces how the anniversary celebrations
shifted over the decade following 1917, describing the emergence and
stabilisation of a revolutionary narrative, script and set of rituals
overseen by ‘official arbiters’.[23]

The twentieth anniversary celebrations of 7th November 1937 coincided
with the height of the purges and a period, in the aftermath of the
First Five Year Plan (1928-1932), in which many people in the Soviet
Union were materially worse off than they had been in the 1920s. A new
narrative of the Revolution emerged positioning Stalin as Lenin’s heir
at the moment many who had participated in the Revolution were being
arrested, imprisoned and killed, including the very cadres who had
heretofore been relied upon to create and organise celebratory mass
spectacles and commemorative exhibitions. The October Revolution was no
longer positioned between the Paris Commune and the victorious global
proletarian revolution; the anniversary reflected a major reappraisal of
Soviet history that plotted a less internationalist historical
trajectory, instead valorising aspects of the imperial past and lauding
heroic individuals, including Peter the Great and Ivan the Terrible.[24]
Tsarist ceremonies were even resuscitated as part of the celebrations,
such as the distribution of keepsakes to children.[25] A shift away from
the masses in favour of the elite was demonstrated by the decision to
pay for a lavish anniversary curtain at the Bolshoi theatre rather than
provide funding to build clubs and theatres in peasant villages.[26] But
the repudiation of Stalinism under Nikita Khrushchev involved a return,
revalorisation and re(re)conceptualisation of the October Revolution,
even if the militaristic form of the main 7th November parade remained
relatively consistent. The fortieth anniversary celebrations in 1957, a
year after Nikita Khrushchev’s ‘secret speech’, saw Mao Zedong join the
First Secretary of the Communist Party atop Lenin’s Mausoleum with
replica Sputniks featuring heavily in the civilian parade. Such
snapshots provide insights into official Soviet culture in each
anniversary year, and indicate the malleable meaning of ‘October’, but a
more meaningful question would be to ask what these rituals meant to the
people who participated in them.

An uneasy relationship between transformation and stability, routine and
rupture, the interruptive and the habitual, the spontaneous and the
conscious in revolutionary anniversary celebrations coursed through
Soviet life and thought. It might be tempting to casually characterise
the former as revolutionary and the latter as reactionary, or to
identify the former with a specific period (pre-Kronstadt, pre-Stalin,
pre-purges, etc.), but the conflict was evident from the very
beginning.[27] As early as 1919 a newspaper article spoke anxiously of
the ‘initial revolutionary upsurge’ giving way to ‘the revolutionary
quotidian’.[28] It is, however, also possible to find exceptions to
narratives of ever-increasing hierarchy and regimentation. As Lynn Mally
observes in her analysis of Soviet amateur theatre, in a mass spectacle
organised in 1927 for the tenth anniversary celebrations called ‘Ten
Octobers’, amateur performers took a far more active and vocal role than
they had in the famous mass spectacles of 1920, indicating that history
never flowed intractably in one direction.[29] Katerina Clark sees this
paradox between the new and the extant at work within the mass
spectacles of 1920, which she notes functioned simultaneously as a
‘celebration of iconoclasm *and* a ritual legitimisation of the status
quo.’[30] Although the latter may not conform to the ruptural logic of
revolution, legitimation of an existing social order is only politically
dubious if the order being affirmed is oppressive and the legitimising
process is coerced. It is one thing to condemn the concrete example of
the 1937 anniversary celebrations as a chilling spectacle (invoking a
feeling similar to that experienced by Goldman in 1921), but it is quite
another to argue that marking an occasion like an anniversary is
inherently antithetical to communist politics in the abstract.

Furthermore, anniversary commemorations were not confined to the Soviet
Union but also played an international role. Invitations to foreign
Communist Party leaders and members were extended and delegations of
revolutionaries and Soviet allies, including women’s and youth
delegations, travelled from across the world to the USSR to attend the
annual Red Square parades. (Although, the famous 1963 photographs of
lava-like Fidel Castro surrounded by ash-like members of the Politburo
on Lenin’s mausoleum were taken on a May Day celebration rather than on
November 7th).[31] Official and unofficial commemorative events were
also hosted abroad. Images of the African American singer and actor Paul
Robeson attending an October Revolution anniversary celebration at the
Soviet embassy in Washington DC in 1950 circulated in the US Press as
part of a campaign by the State Department to brand him a dangerous
‘black Stalin’ figure, whose radical influence might act as a ‘deadly
contagion’ encouraging the spread of decolonisation.[32] Anniversary
rituals may have ossified into routine affirmations of an oppressive
society in one context, but elsewhere they were still charged with a
disruptive energy. Writing on the occasion of the twenty-second
anniversary of the Revolution, in the immediate aftermath of the purges,
C.L.R. James described how its example had reverberated globally,
‘across the oceans and mountains from continent to continent’.[33]
Writing in a British Trotskyist publication, James acknowledged the
‘monstrosity of Stalinism’, but despite the contemporary situation in
the Soviet Union declared that the October Revolution remained an
inspiration to oppressed people across the world, specifically to black
people fighting colonialism and the afterlives of slavery:

> Broken and besmirched, attacked from without and betrayed from within,
> yet it lives. From the great peaks scaled in its early years, it has
> fallen far. But it remains a basis and a banner, a banner torn and
> bedraggled, stained with crimes and blood, carried by treacherous
> hands, but still a symbol of the greatest effort yet made by
> downtrodden humanity to rid the world of economic exploitation and
> political tyranny. To rid the world, not only Russia. Today Negroes,
> weighed down by still heavier burdens than those they carried on
> November 7, 1917, must celebrate that never-to-be forgotten
> anniversary, must reflect on what the Russian Revolution has meant,
> and still means, to them and to all mankind.[34]

Commemoration can function as a form of resistance, remembering what the
ruling class wants forgotten.[35] In capitalist countries outside the
Soviet Union commemorations of the October Revolution were animated by a
distinct temporality; oriented as much to the future as to the past, and
intent on asserting the necessity to break with the prevailing society.
Often taking the form of pageants or performances inspired by Soviet
mass spectacles, theatricality functioned more as a rehearsal for
revolutionary praxis rather than a reproduction of historical
events.[36] As Larne Abse Gogarty observes in her analyses of Edith
Segal’s work with the Needle Trades Workers’ Industrial Union Dance
Group in the USA, dance became a ‘weapon in class struggle’ preparing
workers for the antagonisms of the picket line.[37] In New York City the
eleventh anniversary of the October Revolution was marked by ‘The Giant
Pageant of Class Struggle’, which saw 25,000 people descend on Madison
Square Garden. A year later, for the 1930 anniversary celebrations, the
Workers’ Laboratory Theatre performed a pageant called ‘Turn the Guns’
at the Bronx Coliseum.[38] In 1937, on the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary, Lillian Shapero choreographed a dance inspired by Dziga
Vertov’s film *One Sixth of the World*, which included a ballet
celebrating electrification performed to Marc Blitzstein’s ‘Moscow
Metro’.[39] Mobile, malleable and detached from the historic and
geographical specificities of the events that unfolded in Petrograd in
1917, commemorations of the October Revolution could be experienced as
politically meaningful events of their own.

Counterfeit Lenins
------------------

In Gustave Flaubert’s *Sentimental Education* (1869), the events of the
revolution of 1848 are experienced by the novel’s protagonist as though
they are happening on stage:

The drums beat the charge. Shrill cries arose... Frederic was fascinated
and enjoying

> himself tremendously. The wounded falling to the ground, and the dead
> lying stretched out did not look as if they were really wounded or
> dead. He felt as if he were watching a play.[40]

This passage functions both to emphasise the superficiality of the
character and to characterise the historical events he is witnessing as
phony and inauthentic. In the case of commemorations of the October
Revolution, however, forms of fictionalisation, symbolism and
theatricality were not necessarily deemed antithetical to authentic
experience. Indeed, re-enactments, reproductions and representations
often sought to improve upon, intensify or heighten the original
historical events in the hope of inspiring genuine surges of emotion in
audiences or participants. As Corney discusses, the emphasis of the
early mass spectacles was on physical attendance that would stir ‘a
primarily sensory experience in the individual’.[41] The events were
‘vivid but ephemeral’, like revolutions themselves.[42] Similarly, Clark
notes that the directors of spectacles sought to ‘revive the pathos of
revolution, its élan, and its collectivist, iconoclastic spirit’ through
forms of re-enactment.[43] The emphasis was not on passively recalling
the past through accurate reconstruction, but on actively and creatively
conjuring revolutionary feeling through a interweaving of the past with
the present. Corney traces how relatively subdued aspects of the events
of 1917 became more dramatic in their re-telling, dating the ‘storming’
\[*shturm*\] of the Winter Palace to 1920 rather than 1917, when that
term became established and the location was retroactively enshrined in
the official narrative as an equivalent to the French Revolution’s
Bastille.[44] Similarly, a Soviet state television broadcast of the
seventieth anniversary celebrations in 1987 traces its legacy back to
the first anniversary parades of 1918 before mentioning the actual
revolutions of 1917, as if the former were the historic event being
commemorated.[45]

On May Day 1927 Sergei Eisenstein’s film crew chose a parade across the
Nikolaevsky bridge in Leningrad (as Petrograd had been renamed following
Lenin’s death in 1924) to act as a stand-in for the February Revolution
of 1917 in his film *October*, which had been commissioned to mark the
tenth anniversary of the October Revolution (although, due to Stalin’s
complaint at the prominence of Trotsky, the film was not finished in
time for the 7<sup>th</sup> November celebrations). Demonstrators were
enjoined to carry banners to help with a mass shot. Confused by the
bourgeois slogans on display at the May Day demonstration, ‘two men in
leather coats’ approached co-director Grigori Aleksandrov and he was
taken away for questioning.[46] Aleksandrov’s story highlights that
processes of re-enacting the past unfold in a present of their own and
exist as historical experiences in their own right with potentially
serious repercussions. Aleksandrov notes that in casting the film they
had given preference to people who had been involved in the
revolutionary events over actors, in an attempt to come as close as
possible to recreating the experience of the revolution itself. Yet,
without wanting to wade too deep into the intricacies Soviet aesthetic
debates of the late 1920s, Eisenstein’s film was criticised by many of
his contemporaries, particularly those involved in LEF (Left Front of
the Arts), for deviating too far from, or overly embellishing,
historical events – the sailors smashing the Palace’s wine cellars were
too smartly dressed; they seemed too heroic; they were insufficiently
engaged in drunken carousing, etc.[47] *October* featured the first
cinematic portrayal of Lenin by an actor, which also met with strong
objections. Vladimir Mayakovsky wrote to Eisenstein to express his
outrage at the idea of a ‘counterfeit Lenin’[48], while Osip Brik
referred to it as a ‘forgery’.[49] (Although it would not be long before
cinematic Lenin replicas proliferated, Soviet theatres inserted ‘Lenin
plays’ into their repertoires and Lenin busts and statuettes rolled off
assembly lines.[50]) Esfir Shub, whose ‘compilation film’ *The Fall of
the Romanov Dynasty*, edited together from vast swathes of archival
footage, was also commissioned as part of the tenth anniversary
commemorations, objected to the triumph of metaphor-laden theatricality
over documentary and newsreel in Eisenstein’s film.[51] But Eisenstein
defended his approach. He was concerned with revolutionary mythology and
insisted that romanticised rumours, even if apocryphal, had a historical
weight and truth content of their own. As Yuri Tsivian notes, he
preferred ‘the popular legend to the true story’.[52] Anne Nesbet
observes scrupulously that Aleksandrov’s anecdote may also be
apocryphal. The question is: does it matter? The answer would
necessarily be different today than it was to critics of Eisenstein’s
film in 1927.

Nesbet reads *October* as an attempt to make the experiences of history,
which have a tendency to slip past in the lower-case blur of routine
existence, properly ‘Historical’ through aestheticisation. But in
contrast to Eisenstein’s own pronouncements on the conceptual clarity of
‘intellectual montage’, Nesbet insists persuasively on the strange
effects produced by the various doubles, copies and replicas that appear
in *October*, on the queasy, slippery and unsettled relationships
between past and present that the film depicts.[53] *October,* itself a
kind of maquette of history with an animated model of Lenin at its
centre, constantly contrasts real people and statues. Kerensky is
juxtaposed with a statue of Napoleon, the revolutionary masses with a
statue of Alexander III, a Bolshevik woman with a Rodin sculpture
signifying springtime. Although the meanings of these juxtapositions
might seem clear, Nesbet argues the film nonetheless expresses an
anxiety that ‘the gulf separating flesh from marble’[54] might not be as
definitive as it seems; the situation might reverse, like the famous
shot depicting the destroyed statue of the Tsar reassembling. The
problem of the museum, framed as a troubling paradox for
revolutionaries, is central to her reading of the film, which argues
that *October* poses an uneasy question: ‘How does one prevent these
unreliable, fickle images of the past from infecting the present?’[55]
The Winter Palace and the bourgeois objects within it, Nesbet insists,
seem disarmingly easy to repurpose; little seems to prevent them from
returning just as swiftly to their former uses: ‘The lesson of *October*
seems to be that objects and images can never be entirely tamed…
Eisenstein’s very interest in them argues that they are still too
alluring to be considered harmless.’[56] But could the same be said of
formerly revolutionary objects today? Does an object like *October*
retain a threatening force or has it been rendered harmless by
subsequent history?

Ruined Dreams
-------------

In Miéville’s *October* everything unfolds in the present tense; one
thing follows another but his account lacks the undergirding and guiding
teleology of an orthodox Marxist-Leninist account of history. The
strength of this approach is its refusal to view 1917 through the prism
of, say, 1937. (This is a temptation the curators of the Royal Academy’s
centenary exhibition *Revolution: Russian Art 1917-1932* could not
resist, even though it covered an earlier period.[57]) Miéville does not
take for granted that any particular outcome was assured and his
avoidance of discussing subsequent Soviet history is a convenient,
although perhaps too convenient, way to avoid sinking into melancholy or
despair. The reader is submerged in the chaotic events as they are
unfolding, which rush along giddily and unpredictably. Miéville is also
adept at the telling detail, as in his amusing account of the almost
farcical murder of Rasputin or his evocative description of the
wandering Tsar’s lavishly decorated, opulent railway carriage, rattling
incongruously around in the vast snowy landscapes.[58] His approach is
closer to Shub’s ‘compilation film’ than it is to the intellectual
montage and symbolism of Eisenstein. It is nonetheless significant that
the most prominent English-language account of the October Revolution
published to mark the centenary was written by a novelist rather than a
historian: ‘it is precisely as a *story* that I have tried to tell
it’.[59] This is not to accuse Miéville of falsifying or embellishing
history, but to note that his approach advocates an aestheticised,
emotion-stirring approach to the recounting of revolutionary events,
similar in intent to the mass spectacles; a revolutionary commemoration
that wants to reach beyond the confines of past.

Despite the rousing effect produced by Miéville’s pacey prose, however,
the book’s resolute confinement to a linear narrative of 1917 ultimately
strains to make a claim on the present. After the excitement of the
events of 1917, the book concludes underwhelmingly with a limp Epilogue.
The mood is sombre; the light is dim. At least, Miéville ventures
weakly, it is not completely dark. Miéville glosses over what actually
happened next with the jarringly abrupt statement: ‘We know where this
is going: purges, gulags, starvation, mass murder.’[60] Ultimately
*October* tows a fairly standard Trotskyist line, repeating a narrative
of progressive ossification that barely mentions the post-Stalin period
at all. There is a kind of submerged telos in the assumption that
‘catastrophe’ simply followed ‘dreamworld’ (to borrow Susan Buck-Morss’s
terms), while a more uncomfortable and contradictory account would
attend to overlaps, retreats and resurgences of both poles over time.
Surely contending with Soviet history (which, after all, included a lot
besides ‘purges, gulags, starvation, mass murder’, especially after
Stalin’s death in 1953), must form part of any attempt to explore the
possibilities that the example of the October Revolution presents us
with in the post-Soviet present, when we no longer know where anything
is going at all. Doing so might not involve imagining ourselves as being
in sync with revolutionaries of the past, but instead demand that we
reckon with our distance and difference from them.

A far bleaker vision of the present underpins Enzo Traverso’s *Left-Wing
Melancholia* (2016), which repeatedly reminds the reader that ‘the
history of revolutions is a history of defeats’.[61] Traverso treats
communism as a dead object, a finished experience. He speaks of the
paralysis of the utopian imagination, and observes the discursive
displacement of the heroic ‘vanquished’ by the pitiable and passive
figure of the ‘victim’. According to his narrative, radical political
possibility disappeared with the Berlin wall. 1989 figures as an
‘internalised shipwreck that produced a blooming of memories’[62] and
the twenty-first century emerges as a ‘landscape of fragmented
sufferings’.[63] Unlike the revolutionary defeats of the past, which
spurred on future radical movements, he sees 1989 as a kind of final
capitulation after which past struggles have no longer been understood
as part of a future-orientated revolutionary continuum in which the
October Revolution, Spanish Civil War, Cuban Revolution, May ‘68 etc.,
were strung together by a single red thread: ‘the eclipse of utopias
engendered by our “presentist” time has almost extinguished Marxist
memory’.[64] One of the book’s major contentions is that an obsession
with ‘memory’, with its attendant discipline, ‘Memory Studies’, emerged
with the collapse of ‘actually existing socialism’. For Traverso
‘left-wing melancholia’ is a repressed strain in Marxist thought, which
retains a commitment to honouring the ‘vanquished’ of history absent
from dominant liberal understandings of memory (and one which seems to
demand an overbearing tone of ponderous solemnity[65]), but he
nonetheless seems to take for granted that the future is dead. In a
rubble-strewn book dominated by ghosts, shipwrecks and ruins under an
unchanging crepuscular light (which unlike in Miéville’s *October* never
threatens to break into the hopeful glimmers of dawn), Traverso’s
occasional references to possible redemption feel tepid and
unconvincing, even to himself: ‘the loss appears irreparable’.[66] In
this bleak landscape of endless ash and no lava, revolutionary
commemoration is fixated on the past and severs all ties to political
action in the present.[67]

Traverso’s vision of the contemporary world as a landscape of ruins is a
familiar one. After 1989 the archaeological metaphor emerges as a common
motif, particularly in the work of those on the Anglophone left seeking
to rescue something of the optimistic utopianism of the early twentieth
century for the present, evincing nostalgia for a past that could still
imagine the possibility of a radically different future.[68] Critiques
of ‘Ostalgia’ and ‘ruin porn’ are well-rehearsed by now. The anxiety is
that scrubbed and aestheticised fragments of the revolutionary past
circulate shorn of historical context, drained of political meaning,
reduced to nothing more than diverting relics, which pose no threat to
the existing state of things. As Traverso writes:

> We cannot exclude the possibility that our descendants will remember
> the historical experience of twentieth-century socialism as an
> isolated monument in an empty square, a vestige of the past whose
> charm will lie in its ‘age value’.[69]

Images circulate online as kitsch distractions: disinterred Lenin in the
long grass, underwater Lenin encrusted with barnacles, Arctic Lenin
submerged in snow up to his shoulders, desert Lenin among palm trees,
mossy Lenin in parks full of other Lenins. The left-wing historian as
archaeologist hopes that another kind of excavation might be possible;
one that could reignite past hopes in the present and that would insist
that the remnants of the past, like the threatening bourgeois objects in
*October*, retain something of their original meaning. But this seems to
imply that the excavated objects could be pulled whole from the rubble,
that the cracks and holes caused by subsequent history could be erased
or fixed. Revolutionary commemoration as a practice, as opposed to a
scholarly theory or mode of curation, is less concerned with meticulous
reconstruction, preservation or the placid cataloguing of remains than
it is with looting the past for contingent political ends.

Contemporary, Immediate, Up-to-the-minute
-----------------------------------------

> The statues are already defaced. Stripped of paint through centuries
> of erosion, they are beyond further damage. They’ve been torn out of
> context, inventoried, allegorised, eclipsed by their own exegetical
> apparatus. They can’t see, their eyes are vacant, they leave us
> cold—they can’t threaten or entice us. Blankly staring, their gaze has
> no more power to seduce. But let’s turn them sideways, just in
> case.[70]

Rebecca Comay

Following the defeat of the Paris Commune, tourists visited Paris to see
its ruins, but the status of those charred remains was ambiguous. Scott
McCracken remarks of the ruins of the Palais des Tuileries:

> The afterlife of the palace, a symbol of monarchy whose ruins became a
> symbol of its overthrow, corresponds to a recognisably modernist set
> of cultural responses to the reaction that follows a revolution’s
> defeat. The erasure of the event is never total. Traces both material
> and textual are always left over, and the collection and rearrangement
> of these vestiges offers the same three possibilities as for the
> palace: restoration, the making of a lost connection with the past;
> reconstruction, a re-engagment with the past and an anticipation of
> the future; obliteration, the cutting off from the past to make a new
> future.[71]

In *Communal Luxury*, her recent book on the political imaginary of the
Paris Commune, Kristin Ross cites a *New York Times* article that
interviews an Occupy Oakland activist who gives her name as Louise
Michel, a reference to the infamous Communard that the journalist failed
to pick up on.[72] ‘We call for a general strike around the country, and
around the world’, the activist is quoted as saying just days before the
blockade of the port of Oakland in 2011.[73] Unlike Traverso, who is
dismissive of the disparate political movements that erupted at that
time, Ross explicitly addresses her book to the possibility of political
transformation in the present. She is not melancholic and resigned, but
hopeful and engaged. It is these kinds of echoes, resonances and returns
in which she is interested, not solemn, organised commemorative
occasions, but improvised citations in which the past momentarily
collides with and inspires revolutionary movements now.

The death of a teleological conception of history structured by a logic
of inevitability is nothing to mourn (and there’s little point in
bemoaning the collapse of the Soviet Union either), its disappearance
might create space for struggles from the past that have been
historically marginalised by the orthodox left to fray the taut
narratives of familiar red threads to weave something new. In contrast
to Emma Goldman’s sorrowful account of the official commemoration of the
Paris Commune in Petrograd, Ross describes the furtive and impromptu
ways historical memory can form part of revolutionary praxis; fleeting
dreamworlds constructed within and against the on-going catastrophe of
capitalist social relations. Ross suggests that revolutionary
commemorations need not take the form of static statues to soberly
contemplate in an unchanging museum of left-wing hagiography, but can be
ephemeral, darting and disruptive acts. As Vladimir Mayakovsky wrote in
the 1921 preface to his play *Mystery-Bouffe*, originally written to
commemorate the first anniversary of the October Revolution in 1918:

> Mystery Bouffe is a high road – the high road of the Revolution. No
> one can predict with certainty how many more mountains will have to be
> blasted away by those of us who are travelling that high road. Today
> the name of Lloyd George rings harshly in our ears; but tomorrow he
> will have been forgotten even by the English. Today the will of
> millions is surging toward the Commune; in another fifty years the
> airborne battleships of the Commune may be rushing to the attack of
> distant planets ... Therefore, all persons performing, presenting,
> reading, or publishing Mystery-Bouffe should change the content,
> making it contemporary, immediate, up-to-the-minute.[74]

Perhaps it is only possible to access counterfeit versions of October,
but revolutionary commemoration could involve re-reading the scripts of
the past as inspiration for new improvisations; returning to history not
as archaeologists or curators but as actors.

[1] This statement is cited by Daniel Gerould in ‘Eisenstein's
"Wiseman"’, *The Drama Review: TDR,* 18:1 (1974), 71–76, 73.

[2] Emma Goldman, *Living my Life* (1931),
[*https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/emma-goldman-living-my-life*](https://theanarchistlibrary.org/library/emma-goldman-living-my-life).

[3] Alexander Berkman’s *The Kronstadt Rebellion* (1922) ends by noting
the coincidence of the anniversary of the beginning of the Paris Commune
and the supposed ‘victory’ over Kronstadt,
[*https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/berkman/1922/kronstadt-rebellion/ch7.htm*](https://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/berkman/1922/kronstadt-rebellion/ch7.htm).

[4] Victor Serge, *Memoirs of a Revolutionary*, trans. Peter Sedgwick
with George Paizis (New York, NY: New York Review Books, 2012), 152.
Serge provides an explanation of why he and his Communist comrades,
‘after many hesitations, and with unutterable anguish’, ultimately chose
to side with the Party despite their sympathy with the uprising
(*Memoirs*, 150). Paul Avrich’s historical account takes a similar view:
‘Kronstadt presents a situation in which the historian can sympathise
with the rebels and still concede the Bolsheviks were justified in
subduing them. To recognise this, indeed, is to grasp the full tragedy
of Kronstadt.’ Paul Avrich, *Kronstadt, 1921* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1970), 6.

[5] Avrich makes this point and argues that it was only in hindsight
that this event acquired a more intense symbolic status, *Kronstadt,
1921*, 228.

[6] Leon Trotsky, ‘Hue and Cry over Kronstadt’, *The New International*
4:4 (April 1938), 103–106,
[*https://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1938/01/kronstadt.htm*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1938/01/kronstadt.htm).

[7] Avrich, *Kronstadt, 1921*, 213.

[8] Leon Trotsky, ‘Lessons of the Paris Commune’ (February 1921),
[*https://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1921/02/commune.htm*](https://www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1921/02/commune.htm).
Lenin discusses the Paris Commune at length in the third chapter of *The
State and Revolution* (1917). He is said to have danced in the snow on
the day the Bolsheviks’ time in power outlasted the Paris Commune.

[9] Andy Willimott, *Living the Revolution: Urban Communes and Soviet
Socialism, 1917-1932* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017), 42.

[10] Richard Stites, *Revolutionary Dreams: Utopian Vision and
Experimental Life in the Russian Revolution* (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1989), 111. Stites lists numerous new baby names that came into
use after the October Revolution, some more conceptual (Joy, Spark,
Electric, Rebel), some based on revolutionary figures (Marx, Engels,
Robespierre, Rosa Luxemburg).

[11] On the ‘happy child as icon of Soviet transformation’ see Lisa A.
Kirschenbaum, *Small Comrades: Revolutionising Childhood in Soviet
Russia, 1917-1932* (London: RoutledgeFalmer, 2001), 163.

[12] James von Geldern, *Bolshevik Festivals, 1917–1920* (Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 1993), 186.

[13] Irina Shilova, ‘Building the Bolshevik Calendar through Pravda and
Izvestiia’, *Toronto Slavic Quarterly*, 14 (2007),
[*http://sites.utoronto.ca/tsq/19/shilova19.shtml*](http://sites.utoronto.ca/tsq/19/shilova19.shtml).

[14] See, Jay Bergman, ‘The Paris Commune in Bolshevik Mythology’,
*English Historical Review*, 129:541 (2014), 1412–1441. On the Paris
Commune’s shifting status as prototype for the 1905 Revolution and both
the February and October Revolutions of 1917, see Casey Harison, ‘The
Paris Commune of 1871, the Russian Revolution of 1905, and the Shifting
of the Revolutionary Tradition’, *History and Memory*, 19:2 (2007),
5–42. Harison notes that the annual anniversary marches to Père Lachaise
in Paris were reinvigorated following the October Revolution;
revolutionary inspiration did not only flow in one direction (24).

[15] Trotsky, ‘Lessons of the Paris Commune’.

[16] Michael David Fox, *Revolution of the Mind: Higher Learning Among
the Bolsheviks, 1918-1929* (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997),
116, 231.

[17] China Miéville, *October: The Story of the Russian Revolution*
(London: Verso, 2017), 3.

[18] Frederick C. Corney, *Telling October: Memory and the Making of the
Bolshevik Revolution* (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2004)
52-56.

[19] Von Geldern, *Bolshevik Festivals*, 95.

[20] Corney, *Telling October*, 58.

[21] Stites, *Revolutionary Dreams*, 91.

[22] Von Geldern similarly describes a tension in the anniversary
celebrations between ‘artists’ iconoclastic exuberance and the
organisers who wanted to tame that exuberance’, Bolshevik Festivals, 93.

[23] Corney, Telling October, 104.

[24] On the 1937 anniversary, see Karen Petrone, *Life Has Become More
Joyous Comrades: Celebrations in the Time of Stalin* (Bloomington, IN:
University of Indiana Press, 2000), 149–174. On the centrality of
artistic debates in that year (which was also the centenary of Pushkin’s
death), see Katerina Clark, *Moscow, The Fourth Rome: Stalinism,
Cosmopolitanism, and the Evolution of Soviet Culture, 1931–1941*
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011), 79–80. On shifts in
historiography that attended the fiftieth anniversary celebrations
another thirty years later, see Robert V. Daniels, ‘Soviet Historians
Prepare for the Fiftieth’, *Slavic Review*, 26:1 (1967), 113–118.

[25] Petrone, *Life Has Become More Joyous Comrades*, 158.

[26] Petrone, *Life Has Become More Joyous Comrades*, 153.

[27] For a discussion of the ‘dialectic of permanence and
transformation’ in Soviet thought considered in the *longue durée*, see
Galin Tihanov, ‘Continuities in the Soviet Period’, in *A History of
Russian Thought,* ed. William Leatherbarrow and Derek Offord (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2010) 311–339, 331.

[28] *Ural’skii rabochii*, 81, 7 November 1919, 6, cited in Corney,
*Telling October*, 92.

[29] Lynn Mally, *Revolutionary Acts: Amateur Theater and the Soviet
State, 1917-1938* (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2016), 106.

[30] Clark, *Petrograd*, 130 (my emphasis).

[31] A forthcoming collection edited by Jean-François Fayet, Valérie
Gorin and Stefanie Prezioso will explore international commemorations of
the October Revolution:
[*https://www.lwbooks.co.uk/book/echoes-of-october*](https://www.lwbooks.co.uk/book/echoes-of-october).
For a typical itinerary of a foreign politician, culminating in
attendance at the anniversary celebrations, see AS Kochetov, *The Guest
from Ethiopia* (1980). Synopsis here:
[*https://www.net-film.eu/film-8452/*](https://www.net-film.eu/film-8452/).

[32] Kate Baldwin, *Beyond the Color Line and the Iron Curtain: Reading
Encounters Between Black and Red, 1922–1963* (Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, 2009), 250.

[33] C.L.R. James (under the pseudonym J.R. Johnson), ‘The Negro
Question: The Greatest Event in History,’
https://www.marxists.org/archive/james-clr/works/1939/11/greatest.html.
Originally published in *Socialist Appeal*, 3, 87, 14 November 1939,
p. 3. The online forum ‘Black October’ (which includes a reading list as
well as a wide-ranging series of essays), published on the African
American History Society’s ‘Black Perspectives’ site to mark the
centenary, considers the relationship of the African diaspora to the
Soviet Union:
<http://www.aaihs.org/blackoctober-reading-list-the-russian-revolution-and-the-african-diaspora/>.
For a reflection on the legacy of the October Revolution in India, see:
Abhishek Bhattacharyya, ‘A Hundred Years of the Russian Revolution in
India’, *New Socialist*, 30 December 2017,
<https://newsocialist.org.uk/a-hundred-years-of/>.

[34]  James, ‘The Negro Question’.
-----------------------------

[35] On how the French state repressed the popular memory of the Paris
Commune, for example, see Colette E. Wilson, *Paris and the Commune,
1871–78: the Politics of Forgetting *(Manchester, Manchester University
Press, 2007).

[36] Clark notes this was also the purpose of *Toward a World Commune*
which was performed before a military audience and intended as
inspiration for the army’s upcoming operations against the Polish.
Clark, *Petrograd*, 131.

[37] Larne Abse Gogarty, ‘Cells in Organisms/Cogs in Machines: 1930s
Proletarian Performance and Jazz’, *Cesura/Acceso* 2 (2017), 20–39, 22.

[38] Ellen Graff, *Stepping Left: Dance and Politics in New York City,
1928–1942* (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1999), 34–35.

[39] Julia L. Mickenberg, *American Girls in Red Russia: Chasing the
Soviet Dream* (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2017), 224.

[40] Gustave Flaubert, *Sentimental Education*, trans. Robert Baldick
(London: Penguin, 1964), 286. In *The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Bonaparte* (1852) Karl Marx also employs theatrical analogies in his
discussion of the same historical moment, although he was less concerned
about historical actors dressing in the costumes of the past than he was
in the genre of the performance (tragedy preferable to farce) and the
dressing-up box being raided (Ancient Rome preferable to crass
impersonations of Napoleon).

[41] Corney, *Telling October*, 91.

[42] Corney, *Telling October*, 93.

[43] Clark, *Petrograd*, 132–133.

[44] Corney, *Telling October*, 90.

[45] ‘Soviet October Revolution Parade, 1987 Part I’,
[*https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1SmuBMANFKw*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1SmuBMANFKw).

[46] GV Aleksandrov, *Epokha i kino* \[*Epoch and Cinema*\] (Moscow:
Izdatel’stvo politicheskoi literaturi, 1983), 104.

[47] The first objection was voiced by Sergei Tret’iakov, the second and
third by Osip Brik, see Yuri Tsivian, ‘Eisenstein and Russian Symbolist
Culture: an Unknown Script of October’ in *Eisenstein Rediscovered*, ed.
Ian Christie and Richard Taylor (New York, NY: Routledge, 2005), 75–104,
89. Thanks to Alex Fletcher for recommending this essay.

[48] Anne Nesbet, *Savage Junctures: Sergei Eisenstein and the Shape of
Thinking* (London: IB Taurus, 2003), 78.

[49] Jeremy Hicks, *Dziga Vertov: Defining Documentary Film* (New York,
NY: IB Tauris, 2007), 102.

[50] On Lenin plays in the 1930s see Petrone, *Life Has Become More
Joyous Comrades*, 166. On the deification of Lenin, see Nina Tumarkin,
*Lenin Lives! the Lenin Cult in Soviet Russia* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1997).

[51] See, Esfir Shub, ‘We Do not Deny the Element of Mastery’, *Film
Factory: Russian and Soviet Cinema in Documents*, ed. by Ian Christie
and Richard Taylor (New York, NY: Routledge, 2015), 185–186. On Shub
see, Esther Leslie, ‘Art, Documentary and the Essay Film’, *Radical
Philosophy*, 192 (2015), 7–14.

[52] Tsivian, ‘Eisenstein and Russian Symbolist Culture’, 92.

[53] Anne Nesbet, *Savage Junctures: Sergei Eisenstein and the Shape of
Thinking*, (London: IB Taurus, 2003), 77. Corney also discusses
*October*, specifically the involvement of and antagonisms between
people who had been involved in the revolution in the film’s
development, *Telling October*, 205–208.

[54] Nesbet, *Savage Junctures*, 87.

[55] Nesbet, *Savage Junctures,* 89.

[56] Nesbet, *Savage Junctures*, 89.

[57] The exhibition ended with a ‘Room of Memory’, devoted not to
artworks but to photographs of people arrested or killed in the
Stalinist purges.

[58] Miéville, *October*, 37, 64.

[59] Miéville, *October*, 2.

[60] Miéville, *October*, 307.

[61] Enzo Traverso, *Left Wing Melancholia: Marxism, History, and
Memory* (New York, NY: Columbia University Press, 2016), 32.

[62] Traverso, *Left-Wing Melancholia,* 232.

[63] Traverso, *Left-Wing Melancholia,* 18.

[64] Traverso, *Left-Wing Melancholia,* xiv.

[65] See also: TJ Clark, ‘For a Left with No Future’, *New Left Review*,
74 (2012) or Walter Schivelbusch, *The Culture of Defeat: on National
Trauma, Mourning and Recovery* (New York, NY: Henry Holt and Company,
2013). In his review of exhibitions in London commemorating the
centenary of the Revolution, Clark, like Traverso, privileges 1989 over
1917 as the key landmark with which the contemporary left must reckon.
Unlike the sure-footed sombre tone of his earlier piece on the
supposedly moribund left, however, this review strikes a more anxious
and uncertain note (eight of the ten sentences in the opening paragraph
end with a question mark). Clark seems less concerned with the status of
revolutionary history today than he does with his fraught relationship
to his past political commitments. See, TJ Clark, ‘Reinstall the
Footlights’, *London Review of Books*, 39, 22, 16 November 2017,
<https://www.lrb.co.uk/v39/n22/tj-clark/reinstall-the-footlights>.

[66] Traverso, *Left-Wing Melancholia,* 48.

[67] Walter Benjamin’s ‘Left-Wing Melancholy’, a scathing review of a
book by poet Erich Kästner, which Traverso skims over briefly, is
addressed to a very specific phenomenon that he identifies in the
supposedly radical literature of Weimar Germany. Despite proclaiming
themselves sympathetic to the working class, poets like Kästner,
Benjamin claims, address themselves to a ‘middle stratum’ of society;
these self-proclaimed left-wing intellectuals ‘are the decayed
bourgeoisie’s mimicry of the proletariat’. Distant from political
action, these writers render forms of political struggle as pleasant
objects to consume for the titillation and amusement of a bourgeois
public. The left-wing melancholic is a reactionary figure, politically
complacent and nihilistic, who reifies political struggles in which they
have no direct involvement. (See Walter Benjamin, ‘Left-Wing
Melancholy,’ *Screen* 15:2 (1974), 28–32, 28.) Wendy Brown’s analysis of
‘left-wing melancholia’ is a clear critique of the tendency although her
characterisation of the post-89 left elsewhere is ultimately not so
dissimilar from Traverso’s.

[68] See, for example: Svetlana Boym, *The Future of Nostalgia* (New
York, NY: Basic Books, 2001), 78; Susan Buck-Morss, *Dreamworld and
Catastrophe: the Passing of Mass Utopia in East and West* (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 2000), 68; T.J. Clark, *Farewell to an Idea*: *Episodes
in the History of Modernism*, (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
1999), 1; Mike Davis, *City of Quartz: Excavating the Future in Los
Angeles* (London: Verso, 1990), 12; and Owen Hatherley, *Militant
Modernism* (Winchester: Zero Books, 2009), 8 (with apologies to Owen
Hatherley who I know would probably not make the same arguments now).
Traverso also sets out to ‘excavate’, *Left-Wing Melancholia,* xv.

[69] Traverso, *Left-Wing Melancholia*, 43. Obviously such observations
do not account for the status of that past *within* the former Soviet
Union (especially in former Soviet Republics other than Russia) or in
other parts of the former Eastern bloc, as policies pertaining to the
removal of literal monuments from the Communist era clearly demonstrate,
indicating the limits of Traverso’s ‘we’.

[70] Rebecca Comay, ‘Defaced Statues: Idealism and Iconoclasm in Hegel's
*Aesthetics*’, *October* 149 (2014), 123–142, 124.

[71] Scott McCracken, ‘The Author as Arsonist’, *Modernity/Modernism*
21:1 (2014), 71–87, 80.

[72] Kristin Ross, *Communal Luxury: the Political Imaginary of the
Paris Commune* (London: Verso Books, 2016), 16 (epub).

[73] http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/02/us/oakland-activists-regroup-and-call-for-general-strike.html.

[74] Vladimir Mayakovsky, *Plays*, trans. Guy Daniels (Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press, 1995), 39.
